# Sequential Data Definition

## Source data
We address the problem of learning on discrete event sequences generated by real-world users.

### Raw table data
Lifestream data can be presented as table where rows are events and columns are event attributes.

Columns can be of the following data types:

- `user_id` - id for collecting events in sequences.
We assume that there are many users in the dataset and associated sequences of events.
An event can only be linked to one user.
- `event_time` - is timestamp, used for ordering events in sequence.
It's possible extract date-time features from timestamp.
If the timestamp is not available, you can use any data type that can define the order.
- `feature fields` - describe a properties of events. Can be numerical, categorical or any type that can be converted to feature vector.

Credit card transaction history is a example of lifestream data.

| client_id | date_time           | mcc_code | amount   |
| --------- | ------------------- | -------: |  ------: |
|     A0001 | 2021-03-01 12:00:00 |   6011   |  1000.00 |
|     A0001 | 2021-03-01 12:15:00 |   4814   |    12.05 |
|     A0001 | 2021-03-04 10:00:00 |   5411   |  2312.99 |
|     A0001 | 2021-03-04 10:00:00 |   5411   |   199.99 |
|     E0123 | 2021-02-05 13:10:00 |   6536   | 12300.00 |
|     E0123 | 2021-03-05 12:04:00 |   6536   | 12300.00 |
|     E0123 | 2021-04-05 11:22:00 |   6536   | 12300.00 |

In this example we can find two users (clients) with two sequences. First contains 4 events, second contains 3 events.
We sort events by `date_time` for each user to assure correct event order.
Each event (transaction) are described by categorical field `mcc_code`, numerical field `amount`, and time field `date_time`.
These fields allow to distinguish events, vectorize them na use as a features.

`pytorch-lifeatream` supports this data format and provides the tools to process it through a pipeline.
Data can be `pandas.DataFrame` or `pyspark.DataFrame`.

### Data collected in lists
Table data should be converted to format more convenient for neural network feeding.
Here are the steps:

1. Feature field transformation: encoding categorical features, amount normalizing, missing values imputing.
This works like sklearn fit-transform preprocessors.
2. Splitting all events by `user_id` and sort events by `event_time`. 
We transfer flat table with events to set of users with event collections.
3. Split events by feature fields.
Features are stored as 1d-arrays. Sequence orders are kept.

Previous example (сredit card transaction history) can be presented as (feature transformation missed for visibility):

```
[
    {
        client_id: 'A0001',
        date_time: [2021-03-01 12:00:00, 2021-03-01 12:15:00, 2021-03-04 10:00:00, 2021-03-04 10:00:00],
        mcc_code: [6011, 4814, 5411, 5411],
        amount: [1000.00, 12.05, 2312.99, 199.99],
    },
    {
        client_id: 'E0123',
        date_time: [2021-02-05 13:10:00, 2021-03-05 12:04:00, 2021-04-05 11:22:00],
        mcc_code: [6536, 6536, 6536],
        amount: [12300.00, 12300.00, 12300.00],
    },
]
```
                                
This is a main input data format in `pytorch-lifeatream`. Supported:

- convert from raw table to collected lists both for `pandas.DataFrame` and `pyspark.DataFrame`
- fast end effective storage in parquet format
- compatible `torch.Dataset` and `torch.Dataloader`
- in-memory augmentations and transformations

## Dataset
`pytorch-lifeatream` provides multiple `torch.Dataset` implementations.
Dataset item presents a single user information and can be a combination of:

- `record` - is a dictionary where keys are feature names and values are 1d-tensors with feature sequences.
Similar as data collected in lists. 
- `id` - how to identify a sequence
- `target` - target value for supervised learning

Code example:
```python
dataset = SomeDataset(params)
X = dataset[0]
```

## DataLoader
The main feature of `pytorch-lifestream` dataloader is customized `collate_fn`, provided to `torch.DataLoader` class.
`collate_fn` collects single records of dictionaries to batch.
Usually `collate_fn` pads and packs sequences into 2d tensors with shape `(B, T)`, where `B` - is sample num and `T` is max sequence length.
Each feature packed separately.

Output is `PaddedBatch` type which collects together packed sequences and lengths.
`PaddedBatch` is compatible with all `pytorch-lifestream` modules.

Input and output example:
```python
# input
batch = [
    {'cat1': [0, 1, 2, 3], 'amnt': [10, 20, 10, 10]},
    {'cat1': [3, 1], 'amnt': [13, 6]},
    {'cat1': [1, 2, 3], 'amnt': [10, 4, 10]},
]

batch = PaddedBatch(
    payload = {
        'cat1': [
            [0, 1, 2, 3],
            [3, 1, 0, 0],
            [1, 2, 3, 0],
        ],
        'amnt': [
            [10, 20, 10, 10],
            [13, 6, 0, 0],
            [10, 4, 10, 0],
        ]
    },
    seq_len = [4, 2, 3]
)

```

